_mps/matrices.md, before:

---
title: Mini-Project 6
subtitle: Matrices (two-dimensional arrays)
repo: <https://github.com/Grinnell-CSC207/mp-matrices-maven>
summary: |
  We build a more complex ADT. Along the way, we continue
  to explore multiple ways to implement such data structures.
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this project. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your solution.  If you
  receive help from anyone, make sure to cite them in your responses.
link: false
---
## Introduction

We've explored Java's one-dimensional arrays and even used them to implement our own data structures, including _dynamic arrays_ and _associative arrays_. But what if we want two-dimensional arrays (sometimes referred to as "matrices")?

As you may recall, when writing array-like methods in standard Java syntax, we focus on two basic operations.

`public T get(int i)`
  : Get the `i`th element in the array.

`public void set(int i, T val)`
  : Set the `i`th element in the array to `val`.

Both of these methods throw an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` if given an invalid index. (`ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` is a `RuntimeException`, so we need not put our calls in a try/catch block (although it would not hurt us to do so).

For a matrix, we'll need to generalize these a bit.

`public T get(int row, int col)`
  : Get the element at the given row and column.

`public void set(int row, int col, T val)`
  : Set the element at the given row and column.

Like `get` and `set` above, these can also throw an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` (or just an `IndexOutOfBoundsException`, if you'd prefer).

What other methods will we need?

Ideally, we'll have a constructor. Or maybe two constructors. One will take three parameters: a width, a height, and a default value to return when there's a call to `get` not preceded by a corresponding call to `set`. The other will behave similarly, but always return `null` when a call to `get` asks for an "empty" cell. (That's what arrays do.)

Since we want to be careful not to call `get` or `set` with an invalid row or column, we should provide `width()` and `height()` methods.

That seems straightfoward, doesn't it? But let's make our ADT a bit more complex. Suppose, in our discussions of applications, we've found that the applications require that we be able to change the size of the array. We'll need to add some methods for those purposes.

`void insertRow(int row)`
  : Insert a row filled with the default value.

`void insertRow(int row, T[] vals)`
  : Insert a row filled with the specified values.

`void insertCol(int col)`
  : Insert a column filled with the default value.

`void insertCol(int col, T[] vals)`
  : Insert a column filled with the specified values.

`void deleteRow(int row)`
  : Delete the specified row.

`void deleteCol(int col)`
  : Delete the specified column.

An extended example that demonstrates the effects of these methods can be found toward the end of the mini-project.

We might also want to fill portions of the matrix.

`void fillRegion(int startRow, int startCol, int endRow, int endCol, T val)`
  : Fill the region with top boundary `startRow` (inclusive), left
    boundary `startCol` (inclusive), bottom boundary `endRow` (exclusive),
    and right boundary `endCol` (exclusive).

`void fillLine(int startRow, int startCol, int deltaRow, int deltaCol, int endRow, int endCol, T val)`
  : Fill the elements at `(startRow, startCol)`, `(startRow + deltaRow, startCol + deltaCol)`, `(startRow + 2 * deltaRow, startCol + 2 * deltaCol)`, ... with `val`. Stop when the current row or column equals or exceeds `endRow` or `endCol`, repectively.

These methods also appear in the extended example.

We should also include a few more standard methods.

`Array2D clone()`
  : Make a clone of the object. (May share references to the
    underlying values.)

`equals(Object other)`
  : Determine if another object is the same as this two-dimensional array.

That seems like enough for now.

## Implementing matrices

How would we implement such structures? As you might expect, there are a variety of ways we can implement two-dimensional arrays.

### Implementing matrices as arrays of arrays

The most straightforward is to have an array of arrays. Here's what such an implementation might look like for a 3-wide by four-high two-dimensional array (with the indices in the individual cells).

```text
rows: *
      |
      v
    +---+     +---+---+---+
    | *-----> |0,0|0,1|0,2|
    +---+     +---+---+---+  +---+---+---+
    | *--------------------> |1,0|1,1|1,2|
    +---+     +---+---+---+  +---+---+---+
    | *-----> |2,0|2,1|2,2|
    +---+     +---+---+---+  +---+---+---+
    | *--------------------> |3,0|3,1|3,2|
    +---+                    +---+---+---+
```

Although this approach is straightforward, two-dimensional arrays are a pain to manage, particularly two-dimensional arrays of values with generic types.

### Implementing matrices with single arrays

We could also use a single array in which we put all the elements of row 0, then all the elements of row 1, then the elements of row 2, and so on and so forth. Here's what the indices look like for a 3 wide by 4 high two-dimensional array stored in this way.

```text
vals: *
      |
      v
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
    |0,0|0,1|0,2|1,0|1,1|1,2|2,0|2,1|2,2|3,0|3,1|3,2|
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

Indexing into this array is relatively straightforward. The value at position `row,col` is at `row * width + col`.

As you may have noted, this implementation requires a bit less memory.

### Implementing matrices with associative arrays

Can we use even less memory? Yes! If we know that the two-dimensional array is "sparse", we can store the structure as an Associative Array that maps row/col pairs to values. Suppose the default value in our 3 wide by 4 high is `"X"` and that we have a "two" at position (1,1) and a "five" at position (3,2).

```
default: *---> "X"
pairs: *
       |
       v
     +---+                        +---+---+
     | *------------------------- | * | * |
     +---+      +---+---+         +-|-+-|-+
     | *------> | * | * |           v   v
     +---+      +-|-+-|-+         (1,1) "two"
                  v   v
                (3,2) "five"
```

Our implementation of `get` is relatively straightforward, something like the following. (We still need error checking.)

```java
public T get(int row, int col) {
  try {
    return pairs.get(new Index(row, col));
  } catch (KeyNotFoundException e) {
    return default;
  } // try/catch
} // get(int, int)
```

Which of these three implementations should we use? Or should we look for another? We'll find that different situations call for different implementations. For this assignment, you can choose which approach to employ.

## Getting ready

We will be sharing test cases in this project, which means that we will have two GitHub repositories: One for your `AssociativeArray` code and one for the shared tests. Using the strategy means that we'll have to do a slightly more complex setup. _Cross your fingers that it works correctly._

a. Fork the repository at {{ page.repo }}.

b. Clone that repository.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs                 # Or the directory of your choice
git clone git@github.com:USERNAME/mp-matrices-maven.git
```

c. Open the project in VSCode.

d. Update the `README.md` appropriately.

e. Push the updated `README` to GitHub.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
git add README.md
git status
git commit -m "Update README to include myself."
git pull
git push
```

f. Add an upstream repository just in case I make changes.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
git remote add upstream https://github.com/Grinnell-CSC207/mp-matrices-maven
```

In the future, you can grab changes using the following.

```text
git fetch upstream
git merge upstream/main
```

You can also just click the **Sync Fork** button on your GitHub page for the fork.

g. Make sure that you can run the experiment in VSCode.

h. You should see two sets of testing files. Make sure that you can run the current tests in VSCode.

i. Make sure that you can run the experiment in Maven.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
mvn exec:java -q
```

j. Make sure that you can run the tests in Maven.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
mvn tests
```

## The assignment

### Part one: Write tests

As you know, good practice suggests that you should write tests before writing code. So start by writing tests. Write a set of tests in the file `TestsByStudent.java`. You should have at least one test for each of the methods in `Matrix`. 

Note that you may want to browse the tests in `TestsBySam.java`

Note that your concrete class is `MatrixV0<T>` rather than `Matrix<T>`.

### Part two: Implement Matrices

In the repository, you will find a `Matrix<T>` interface and a `MatrixV0<T>` class that is intended to implements that interface.

### Part three: Make a simple game

As you might expect, matrices make reasonable platforms for board games, such as Othello or checkers. Create a game, which you will store in a new class in package `edu.grinnell.csc207.main`. You can find sample games in the classes `SampleGame1p` and `SampleGame2p`. 

## Submitting your work

Please submit all of your work on the project to Gradescope by using the GitHub submission mechanism. 

## Approximate rubric

_I am likely to revisit this rubric._

### Redo or above

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements will get an I.

```text
[ ] Passes all the R tests.
[ ] Each class has an introductory Javadoc comment that indicates the author and purpose.
[ ] Includes a `README.md` file that contains the appropriate information
    (authors, purpose, link to GitHub repo, acknowledgements if appropriate).
[ ] All files compile correctly.
```

### Meets expectations or above

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements but meet all
previous requirements will receive an R.

```text
[ ] Passes all the M tests.
[ ] No more than fifteen errors from `mvn checkstyle:check`.
```

### Exemplary / Exceeds expectations

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements but meet all
previous requirements will receive an M.

```text
[ ] Passes all of the E tests.
    [ ] Correctly handles `null` keys in `set`, `get`, and `hasKey`.
[ ] All (or most) repeated code has been factored out into individual methods.
[ ] All or most variable names are appropriate.
[ ] No more than five errors from `mvn checkstyle:check`.
```

## Extended example

For example, suppose our matrix looks like this (conceptually) and our default value is `"O"`.

```text  
      0   1   2   3   4
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `insertCol(2)` should update the matrix to this form.  (Remember that `O` is our default value.)

```text  
      0   1   2   3   4   5
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `insertCol(6, new String[] {"A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F"})` should update the array to this form. Note that althought there was no column 6, since column 6 comes immediately after the last column, inserting at that location is permitted.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   6
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | X | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | O | X | X | X | B |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `insertCol(8, new String[] {"A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F"})` should fail, since we are inserting beyond the bounds of the array. (Immediately after the last column or row is a special case.)

A call to `insertCol(0, new String[] {"A", "B"})` should fail because we are not providing  the appropriate number of values.

A call to `insertRow(0, new String[] {"P", "Q", "R", "S", T", "U", "V"})` should update the array as follows.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   6
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | O | X | X | X | B |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 6  | X | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `deleteCol(1)` should update the array as follows.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | P | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O | X | X | X | B |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 6  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `deleteRow(2)` should result in the following.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | P | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillLine(0, 0, 1, 1, 4, 4, "Z")` should fill the cells at (0,0), (1,1), and (2,2) with `"Z".


```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O | Z | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | Z | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillLine(0, 1, 2, 1, 6, 6, " ")` should fill the cells at (0,1), (2, 2), and (4,3) with a space.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O |   | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | Z | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X |   | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillLine(3, 0, 0, 1, 6, 6, "-")` should fill the cells at (3,0), (3,1), (3,2), (3,3), (3,4), and (3,5) with a dash.


```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O |   | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | - | - | - | - | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X |   | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```


A call to `fillLine(1, 4, 1, 0, 5, 6, "?")` should fill the cells at (1,4), (2,4), (3,4), and (4,4) with a question mark.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | ? | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O |   | X | ? | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | - | - | - | ? | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X |   | ? | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillRegion(1, 1, 5, 4, "@")` should fill the specified region with at signs.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | @ | @ | @ | ? | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillRegion(4, 2, 6, 6, ".")` should fill the last four cells on each of the last two rows.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | @ | @ | @ | ? | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | @ | . | . | . | . |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | . | . | . | . |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

Wasn't that exciting? Once your class works, you should be able to replicate these figures by using `MatrixExperiments`. (However, I created them by hand.)

Questions and Answers
---------------------

_Forthcoming._

### Two-dimensional arrays.

**How would I declare a two-dimensional array?**

> I've used `T[][] contents`.

**How would I initialize that array?**

> The strategy I prefer is to build the outer array of rows and then fill
  it in with the rows.

> First, `contents = T[][] = (T[][]) new Object[height][];`

> Next, a for loop fills in the individual values. Here's a typical line
  from the body. `contents[i] = (T[]) new Object[width];`

> You can also write `contents = new Object[height][width];`, which
  achieves the same goal.

Citations
---------

This assignment is based on [an assignment from CSC-152 1998Sp](https://rebelsky.cs.grinnell.edu/Courses/CS152/98S/Assignments/assignment.03.html).

Commit message:

Minor cleanup of matrices MP.

_mps/matrices.md, after:

---
title: Mini-Project 6
subtitle: Matrices (two-dimensional arrays)
repo: <https://github.com/Grinnell-CSC207/mp-matrices-maven>
summary: |
  We build a more complex ADT. Along the way, we continue
  to explore multiple ways to implement such data structures.
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this project. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your solution.  If you
  receive help from anyone, make sure to cite them in your responses.
link: false
---
_This project is still under development._

## Introduction

We've explored Java's one-dimensional arrays and even used them to implement our own data structures, including _dynamic arrays_ and _associative arrays_. But what if we want two-dimensional arrays (sometimes referred to as "matrices")?

As you may recall, when writing array-like methods in standard Java syntax, we focus on two basic operations.

`public T get(int i)`
  : Get the `i`th element in the array.

`public void set(int i, T val)`
  : Set the `i`th element in the array to `val`.

Both of these methods throw an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` if given an invalid index. (`ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` is a `RuntimeException`, so we need not put our calls in a try/catch block (although it would not hurt us to do so).

For a matrix, we'll need to generalize these a bit.

`public T get(int row, int col)`
  : Get the element at the given row and column.

`public void set(int row, int col, T val)`
  : Set the element at the given row and column.

Like `get` and `set` above, these can also throw an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` (or just an `IndexOutOfBoundsException`, if you'd prefer).

What other methods will we need?

Ideally, we'll have a constructor. Or maybe two constructors. One will take three parameters: a width, a height, and a default value to return when there's a call to `get` not preceded by a corresponding call to `set`. The other will behave similarly, but always return `null` when a call to `get` asks for an "empty" cell. (That's what arrays do.)

Since we want to be careful not to call `get` or `set` with an invalid row or column, we should provide `width()` and `height()` methods.

That seems straightfoward, doesn't it? But let's make our ADT a bit more complex. Suppose, in our discussions of applications, we've found that the applications require that we be able to change the size of the array. We'll need to add some methods for those purposes.

`void insertRow(int row)`
  : Insert a row filled with the default value.

`void insertRow(int row, T[] vals)`
  : Insert a row filled with the specified values.

`void insertCol(int col)`
  : Insert a column filled with the default value.

`void insertCol(int col, T[] vals)`
  : Insert a column filled with the specified values.

`void deleteRow(int row)`
  : Delete the specified row.

`void deleteCol(int col)`
  : Delete the specified column.

An extended example that demonstrates the effects of these methods can be found toward the end of the mini-project.

We might also want to fill portions of the matrix.

`void fillRegion(int startRow, int startCol, int endRow, int endCol, T val)`
  : Fill the region with top boundary `startRow` (inclusive), left
    boundary `startCol` (inclusive), bottom boundary `endRow` (exclusive),
    and right boundary `endCol` (exclusive).

`void fillLine(int startRow, int startCol, int deltaRow, int deltaCol, int endRow, int endCol, T val)`
  : Fill the elements at `(startRow, startCol)`, `(startRow + deltaRow, startCol + deltaCol)`, `(startRow + 2 * deltaRow, startCol + 2 * deltaCol)`, ... with `val`. Stop when the current row or column equals or exceeds `endRow` or `endCol`, repectively.

These methods also appear in the extended example.

We should also include a few more standard methods.

`Array2D clone()`
  : Make a clone of the object. (May share references to the
    underlying values.)

`equals(Object other)`
  : Determine if another object is the same as this two-dimensional array.

That seems like enough for now.

## Implementing matrices

How would we implement such structures? As you might expect, there are a variety of ways we can implement two-dimensional arrays.

### Implementing matrices as arrays of arrays

The most straightforward is to have an array of arrays. Here's what such an implementation might look like for a 3-wide by four-high two-dimensional array (with the indices in the individual cells).

```text
rows: *
      |
      v
    +---+     +---+---+---+
    | *-----> |0,0|0,1|0,2|
    +---+     +---+---+---+  +---+---+---+
    | *--------------------> |1,0|1,1|1,2|
    +---+     +---+---+---+  +---+---+---+
    | *-----> |2,0|2,1|2,2|
    +---+     +---+---+---+  +---+---+---+
    | *--------------------> |3,0|3,1|3,2|
    +---+                    +---+---+---+
```

Although this approach is straightforward, two-dimensional arrays are a pain to manage, particularly two-dimensional arrays of values with generic types.

### Implementing matrices with single arrays

We could also use a single array in which we put all the elements of row 0, then all the elements of row 1, then the elements of row 2, and so on and so forth. Here's what the indices look like for a 3 wide by 4 high two-dimensional array stored in this way.

```text
vals: *
      |
      v
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
    |0,0|0,1|0,2|1,0|1,1|1,2|2,0|2,1|2,2|3,0|3,1|3,2|
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

Indexing into this array is relatively straightforward. The value at position `row,col` is at `row * width + col`.

As you may have noted, this implementation requires a bit less memory.

### Implementing matrices with associative arrays

Can we use even less memory? Yes! If we know that the two-dimensional array is "sparse", we can store the structure as an Associative Array that maps row/col pairs to values. Suppose the default value in our 3 wide by 4 high is `"X"` and that we have a "two" at position (1,1) and a "five" at position (3,2).

```
default: *---> "X"
pairs: *
       |
       v
     +---+                        +---+---+
     | *------------------------- | * | * |
     +---+      +---+---+         +-|-+-|-+
     | *------> | * | * |           v   v
     +---+      +-|-+-|-+         (1,1) "two"
                  v   v
                (3,2) "five"
```

Our implementation of `get` is relatively straightforward, something like the following. (We still need error checking.)

```java
public T get(int row, int col) {
  try {
    return pairs.get(new Index(row, col));
  } catch (KeyNotFoundException e) {
    return default;
  } // try/catch
} // get(int, int)
```

Which of these three implementations should we use? Or should we look for another? We'll find that different situations call for different implementations. For this assignment, you can choose which approach to employ.

## Getting ready

We will be sharing test cases in this project, which means that we will have two GitHub repositories: One for your `AssociativeArray` code and one for the shared tests. Using the strategy means that we'll have to do a slightly more complex setup. _Cross your fingers that it works correctly._

a. Fork the repository at {{ page.repo }}.

b. Clone that repository.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs                 # Or the directory of your choice
git clone git@github.com:USERNAME/mp-matrices-maven.git
```

c. Open the project in VSCode.

d. Update the `README.md` appropriately.

e. Push the updated `README` to GitHub.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
git add README.md
git status
git commit -m "Update README to include myself."
git pull
git push
```

f. Add an upstream repository just in case I make changes.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
git remote add upstream https://github.com/Grinnell-CSC207/mp-matrices-maven
```

In the future, you can grab changes using the following.

```text
git fetch upstream
git merge upstream/main
```

You can also just click the **Sync Fork** button on your GitHub page for the fork.

g. Make sure that you can run the experiment in VSCode.

h. You should see two sets of testing files. Make sure that you can run the current tests in VSCode.

i. Make sure that you can run the experiment in Maven.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
mvn exec:java -q
```

j. Make sure that you can run the tests in Maven.

```text
cd ~/CSC207/MPs/                # Or the directory of your choice
cd mp-matrices-maven
mvn tests
```

## The assignment

### Part one: Write tests

As you know, good practice suggests that you should write tests before writing code. So start by writing tests. Write a set of tests in the file `TestsByStudent.java`. You should have at least one test for each of the methods in `Matrix`. 

Note that you may want to browse the tests in `TestsBySam.java`

Note that your concrete class is `MatrixV0<T>` rather than `Matrix<T>`.

### Part two: Implement Matrices

In the repository, you will find a `Matrix<T>` interface and a `MatrixV0<T>` class that is intended to implements that interface.

## Submitting your work

Please submit all of your work on the project to Gradescope by using the GitHub submission mechanism. 

## Approximate rubric

_I am likely to revisit this rubric._

### Redo or above

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements will get an I.

```text
[ ] Passes all the R tests.
[ ] Each class has an introductory Javadoc comment that indicates the author and purpose.
[ ] Includes a `README.md` file that contains the appropriate information
    (authors, purpose, link to GitHub repo, acknowledgements if appropriate).
[ ] All files compile correctly.
```

### Meets expectations or above

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements but meet all
previous requirements will receive an R.

```text
[ ] Passes all the M tests.
[ ] No more than fifteen errors from `mvn checkstyle:check`.
```

### Exemplary / Exceeds expectations

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements but meet all
previous requirements will receive an M.

```text
[ ] Passes all of the E tests.
    [ ] Correctly handles `null` keys in `set`, `get`, and `hasKey`.
[ ] All (or most) repeated code has been factored out into individual methods.
[ ] All or most variable names are appropriate.
[ ] No more than five errors from `mvn checkstyle:check`.
```

## Extended example

For example, suppose our matrix looks like this (conceptually) and our default value is `"O"`.

```text  
      0   1   2   3   4
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `insertCol(2)` should update the matrix to this form.  (Remember that `O` is our default value.)

```text  
      0   1   2   3   4   5
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | O | X | X | X |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `insertCol(6, new String[] {"A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F"})` should update the array to this form. Note that althought there was no column 6, since column 6 comes immediately after the last column, inserting at that location is permitted.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   6
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | X | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | O | X | X | X | B |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `insertCol(8, new String[] {"A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F"})` should fail, since we are inserting beyond the bounds of the array. (Immediately after the last column or row is a special case.)

A call to `insertCol(0, new String[] {"A", "B"})` should fail because we are not providing  the appropriate number of values.

A call to `insertRow(0, new String[] {"P", "Q", "R", "S", T", "U", "V"})` should update the array as follows.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   6
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | X | O | X | X | X | B |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
 6  | X | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `deleteCol(1)` should update the array as follows.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | P | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O | X | X | X | B |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 6  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `deleteRow(2)` should result in the following.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | P | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | O | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O | X | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | X | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillLine(0, 0, 1, 1, 4, 4, "Z")` should fill the cells at (0,0), (1,1), and (2,2) with `"Z".


```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z | R | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O | Z | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | Z | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X | X | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillLine(0, 1, 2, 1, 6, 6, " ")` should fill the cells at (0,1), (2, 2), and (4,3) with a space.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O |   | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | X | O | X | Z | X | D |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X |   | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillLine(3, 0, 0, 1, 6, 6, "-")` should fill the cells at (3,0), (3,1), (3,2), (3,3), (3,4), and (3,5) with a dash.


```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | X | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O |   | X | X | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | - | - | - | - | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X |   | X | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```


A call to `fillLine(1, 4, 1, 0, 5, 6, "?")` should fill the cells at (1,4), (2,4), (3,4), and (4,4) with a question mark.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | Z | X | X | ? | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | O |   | X | ? | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | - | - | - | ? | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | O | X |   | ? | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillRegion(1, 1, 5, 4, "@")` should fill the specified region with at signs.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | @ | @ | @ | ? | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | E |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | X | X | X | F |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

A call to `fillRegion(4, 2, 6, 6, ".")` should fill the last four cells on each of the last two rows.

```text
      0   1   2   3   4   5   
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 0  | Z |   | S | T | U | V |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 1  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | A |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 2  | X | @ | @ | @ | ? | C |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 3  | - | @ | @ | @ | ? | - |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 4  | X | @ | . | . | . | . |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
 5  | X | O | . | . | . | . |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+
```

Wasn't that exciting? Once your class works, you should be able to replicate these figures by using `MatrixExperiments`. (However, I created them by hand.)

Questions and Answers
---------------------

_Forthcoming._

### Two-dimensional arrays.

**How would I declare a two-dimensional array?**

> I've used `T[][] contents`.

**How would I initialize that array?**

> The strategy I prefer is to build the outer array of rows and then fill
  it in with the rows.

> First, `contents = T[][] = (T[][]) new Object[height][];`

> Next, a for loop fills in the individual values. Here's a typical line
  from the body. `contents[i] = (T[]) new Object[width];`

> You can also write `contents = new Object[height][width];`, which
  achieves the same goal.

Citations
---------

This assignment is loosely based on [an assignment from CSC-152 1998Sp](https://rebelsky.cs.grinnell.edu/Courses/CS152/98S/Assignments/assignment.03.html).
