---
title: Mini-Project 2
subtitle: Fun with Fractions
summary: |
  In this assignment, you will build a simple calculator that works
  with fractions
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this project. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your solution.  If you
  receive help from anyone, make sure to cite them in your responses. 
link: true
---
# {{ page.title }} : {{ page.subtitle }}

You goal in this project is to build a calculator (or perhaps many calculators) that (a) uses fractions as its basic numeric type and (b) includes registers.

## Required classes

* `BigFraction.java`.  An extended version of the `Fraction` class you
  worked on in lab.  You should make sure to reduce your fractions to
  the simplest form.  You should also add other constructors as appropriate.
  You will also likely want to implement some other operations, such
  as subtraction and division.
* `BFCalculator.java`.  The primary workhorse.  This class should
  provide two (non-static) methods.  (But it should not have a `main`.)
    * `evaluate(String exp)` - evaluate an expression, ignoring priority
    * `store(char register)` - store the last value computed in the
      named register.  
* `InteractiveCalculator.java`.  Here, you will provide a `main` method
  that will repeatedly read a line the user types, use a `Calculator`
  to compute the result, and print the result for the user.
* `QuickCalculator.java`.  Here, you will provide a `main` method
  that will take the expressions from the command line and then
  print out the results.

What will the input strings look like?  

* Expressions are sequence of values (either integers, fractions, or 
  register names) separated by spaces and operators.
* Store commands will take the form `STORE reg`, where `reg` is a letter
  of the alphabet.
* We quit with `QUIT`.  (If you know how, you can also stop at the end
  of input.)

For example, here's a session with `InteractiveCalculator`.

```
$ java InteractiveCalculator
> 1/2 + 1/3
5/6
> STORE a
> a + a
5/3                     (or 1 2/3)
> a / 2 + 1
17/12                   (or 1 5/12)
> 1 + a / 2
17/2
> QUIT
```

Here's an example session with `QuickCalculator`.

```
$ java QuickCalculator "1/5 + 1/7" "STORE a" "a + 2"
1/5 + 1/7 = 12/35
a + 2 = 82/35
```

There is no precedence; you should evaluate operations from left to right.  There may be an arbitrary number of values and operations on each line.

## Grading rubric

_Forthcoming._

---

_**Acknowledgements**: Parts of this assignment are inspired by assignments from past versions of CSC-207 (and perhaps even CSC-152)._
