---
title: Mini-Project 3
subtitle: Text layout
summary: |
  We practice with subtype polymorphism by further extending the
  text layout example from the text layout lab.
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this project. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your solution.  If you
  receive help from anyone, make sure to cite them in your responses. 
link: true
---
# {{ page.title }} : {{ page.subtitle }}

_Warning!  This MP is still in draft form._

In this mini-project, you will continue our text layout / text block example.

1\. Implement `Truncated.java`, `Centered.java`, and `RightJustified.java`,
as described in [the lab](../labs/subtype-polymorphism.html).

2\. Implement `HorizontallyFlipped.java` and `VerticallyFlipped.java`, which
do what they say.  (That is, rearrange the text blocks horizontally and
vertically.)

3\. Design and implement at least one other new kind of text block.

4\. There are (at least) three models of equality for `TextBlock` objects:

* Two textblocks are equal if they contain the same lines.
* Two textblocks are equal if they were built in the same way.
* Two textblocks are equal if they occupy the same memory location.

Implement these as `TBUtils.equal(TextBlock t1, TextBlock t2)`, `TBUtils.eqv(TextBlock t1, TextBlock t2)`, and `TBUtils.eq(TextBlock t1, TextBlock t2)`, respectively.  If you find it useful to require and implement similar procedures in each of the kinds of `TextBlocks` (e.g., every `TextBlock` must include `equal(TextBlock other)` or `eqv(TextBlock other)`), you can add them to the interface.

5\. Write appropriate tests for each of your procedures.  Make sure to check edge cases.

## Rubric

## Q&A

What should a call to the `Truncated` constructor look like?
  : `new Truncated(myblock, 5)` truncates the block at 5 characters wide.

What happens when we truncate a `BoxedBlock`?
  : You probably lose the right side of the box.

What should a call to the `Truncated` constructor do if the width is
greater than the width of the block?
  : The `Truncated` block should be the specified width.
  : I suppose it should expand the block with spaces at the right.

Do you have hints for `eqv`?
  : Option one: It could check the types of the objects and make sure
    that they are the same and then recurse on any components.
  : Option two: You could require that all `TextBlock` objects provide
    an `eqv(TextBlock other)` method that does something similar.
  : You should be able to figure out which is better.

Do you have hints for `eq`?
  : I'd use `==`.

What should we name the test file?
  : `TextBlockTests.java`
