---
title: Mini-Project 4
subtitle: Associative arrays
summary: |
  We build our first data structure.  Along the way, we practice with
  generics/parametric polymorphism.
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this project. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your solution.  If you
  receive help from anyone, make sure to cite them in your responses. 
link: true
---
# {{ page.title }} : {{ page.subtitle }}

_Warning!  This MP is still in draft form._

## Introduction

An _associative array_ is a common data structure, similar to the association lists that you may have learned about in CSC-151.  Since it's a data structure, we'll start by considering the layout of the associative array in memory.

In essence, an associative array is an (expandable) array of key/value pairs, intended to support looking up values by key.  I think of them something like the following:

```
        +---+
  size: | 3 |
        +---+
   
  pairs:
  +---+                                                +---+---+
  | *-------------------------------------------------> | * | * |
  +---+                                +---+---+        +-|-+-|-+
  | *--------------------------------> | * | * |          |   v 
  +---+              +---+---+         +-|-+-|-+          | +----------+
  | *--------------> | * | * |           |   v            | | V value0 |
  +---+              +-|-+-|-+           | +----------+   | +----------+
  | / |                |   v             | | V value1 |   v            
  +---+                | +----------+    | +----------+ +--------+  
  | / |                | | V value2 |    |              | K key0 |   
  +---+                | +----------+    v              +--------+      
  | / |                |               +--------+                   
  +---+                |               | K key1 |                   
  |   |                v               +--------+                   
    .                +--------+
    .                | K key2 |
    .                +--------+
```

That is, we have an array of Key/Value pairs along with an accompanying `size` field to keep track of how many pairs are in the array.  The array may have some empty space, which we fill with `null` values.  In the diagram, we've put all the nulls at the end.  However, you might decide that it's more natural to leave some nulls in the middle.

Associative arrays are most frequently used to implement the `Dictionary` or `Map` abstract data types.  Both are names for structures that allow you to store associate values with corresponding keys.  (Each key has only one value; multiple valeus may have the same key.)

The central for such types include the following:

`void set(K key, V value)`
  : Set the value associated with a given key.  If there is already another value associated with the given key, this new value replaces that value. 

`V get(K key)`
  : Get the value associated with a given key.  If there is no such key, throws an exception.

`boolean hasKey(K key)`
  : Determines if the given key appears in the associative array.

`void remove(K key)`
  : Remove the key/value pair associated with the given key.  If the key does not appear in the associative array, does nothing.

`int size()`
  : Determine how many key/value pairs are currently stored in the associative array.

`String toString()`
  : Return a string of the form `"{ key0: value0, key1: value1, ... keyn: aluen }"`

As you might expect, the first four procedures will need to iterate the array of key/value pairs, stopping when they find a matching key or run out of pairs.  We normally use the `equals` method to determine matching keys.

## The assignment

Add at least three tests, including one edge case, to the shared `AssociativeArrayTests.java` shared repository (coming soon).  Please name them with a form like `yourNameTest1()`, `yourNameTest2()`, and `yourNameEdge1()`.  For example, mine would be `samuelRebelskyTest1()`, `samuelRebelskyTest2(0`, and `samuelRebelskyEdge1()`.

Design a set of tests for an `AssociativeArray<K,V>` class.  These should be storied in the file `AssociativeArrayTests.java`.

Implement an `AssociativeArray<K,V>` class in Java.  You may _not_ use any other Java classes that provide similar features; you must rely on an underlying plain Java array.

## Starter code

* [`KeyNotFoundException.java`](../code/associative-arrays/KeyNotFoundException.java)
* [`AssociativeArray.java`](../code/associative-arrays/AssociativeArray.java)
    * _Note that this file includes **two** classes, one of which is semi-private to the primary class.  We use the latter as a convenient way to group values without worrying about using methods to access its fields._
* `AssociativeArrayTests.java` - _Forthcoming_.
* `AssociativeArrayExperiments.java` - _Forthcoming_.
    
## Rubric

_Forthcoming._

## Q&A

