---
title: Mini-Project 5
subtitle: Augmentive and Alternative Communication Devices
summary: |
  In this mini-project, you will use an extended version of the
  AssociativeArray class from the last mini-project to build a
  sample AAC.
collaboration: |
  Each student should submit their own responses to this project. You may
  consult other students in the class as you develop your solution.  If you
  receive help from anyone, make sure to cite them in your responses. 
link: true
---
# {{ page.title }} : {{ page.subtitle }}

In this mini-project, you will explore (a) the use of associative arrays and other kinds of maps, (b) programming to specifications in support of a larger project, (c) dealing with conflicting approaches to Java programming, and (d) considering some of the issues at play in designing software for people with disabilities (and using software as a disabled person).

## The assignment

Do the assignment at <https://accessibilityeducation.github.io/assignments/AAC/AAC.html>, using your `AssociativeArray` class instead of `HashMaps`.  Please leave your `AssociativeArray` and `KVPair` classes in the `structures` package.

## Recommended stages

To do this assignment, you should follow these steps, modifying them as you consider appropriate.

* Read the instructionsi an background.
* Fork and clone the repository at <https://github.com/catiembaker/AACNestedHW>.
* Remove the `.project` package from the repository.
* Add your structures package to the repository (presumably in `src/structures`).
* Create an `AACCategory` class with stub methods that follows the specifications given at <https://accessibilityeducation.github.io/assignments/AAC/AACCategory.html>.
   * Note that your `AACCategory` class will likely contain an `AssociativeArray<String,String>` that maps image locations (strings) to words (also strings).
* Create an `AACMappings` class with stub methods that follows the specifications given at <https://accessibilityeducation.github.io/assignments/AAC/AACMappings.html>.
   * Note that your `AACMappings` class will likely contain an `AACCategory` object that maps filenames to their corresponding words.  You may also want an `AssociativeArray<String,AACCategory>` that maps either filenames or names to categories.
   * Sample stub versions of `getImageLocs()`, `getTexst(String)`, and `getCurrentCategory()` follow.
* Run the application to get a basic sense of how it works (or should work).
   * _Warning!_ At least on my computer, it takes a while to load.
* Start implementing methods.

Note that you will likely need to update `AssociativeArray` to support methods like `getImageLocs()`.

## Sample stub methods

```
  public String[] getImageLocs() {
    return new String[] { "img/food/icons8-french-fries-96.png", "img/food/icons8-watermelon-96.png" }; // STUB
  } // getImageLocs()

  public String getText(String imageLoc) {
    return "television";  // STUB
  }

  public String getCurrentCategory() {
    return "food";  // STUB
  }
```

## Rubric

### Redo or above

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements will get an I.

```
[ ] Includes the specified `.java` files, correctly named.  (They should
    be in the appropriate package.)
[ ] Each class has an introductory Javadoc comment that indicates
    the author and purpose. 
[ ] Includes a `README.md` file that contains the appropriate information 
    (authors, purpose, acknowledgements if appropriate)
[ ] All files compile correctly.
```

### Meets expectations or above

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements but meet all
previous requirements will receive an R.

```
[ ] Appears to follow Google Java style guidelines for indentation and such.
[ ] Appears to correctly load a file.
[ ] Appears to correctly add an image to the top-level category.
[ ] Appears to correctly switch to subcategories.
[ ] Successfully grabs words from subcategories.
[ ] Appears to correctly switch to the default screen.
```

### Exemplary / Exceeds expectations

Submissions that fail to meet any of these requirements but meet all
previous requirements will receive an M.

```
[ ] All (or most) repeated code has been factored out into individual 
    methods.  
[ ] All or most variable names are appropriate.
[ ] `AACCategory` and `AACMappings` do not access any fields in
    `AssociationList` or `KVPair`.
```

## Q&A

How do we add new categories?

> It seemed from the specs that categories are only created when
  you load the file upon creating a new `AACMapppings`.  However,
  upon looking at the underlying code, I determined that any images
  on the default screen are considered categories.

I hear you also did this MP.  What part did you find hardest?

> Yes, I did this MP.  I try to do most of them.  I found writing a
  `keys` method for `AssociationList` the hardest part because 
  creating arrays using generics is painful.  I assume there's a good
  way to do it, but I always find myself struggling.

How did you address the problem?

> Since we only need an array of strings I was tempted to write at
  `String[] keyNames` method.  However, that seemed like an easy
  out.  If I were re-designing the assignment, I'd probably require
  that we provide an iterator for keys rather than an array of keys.

> In the end, I used something similar to the mechanism I used in
  the constructor.  That is, I used `Arrays.newInstance` using the
  first key in the pairs array to specify the type.  

> Of course, I couldn't do that if I had no key/value pairs, so I
  returned `null` in that case, which complicated the implementation
  of `getImages`.

What else was difficult?

> I didn't see a natural way to write `isCategory`; it seemed much more
  natural to check if a word is a cateogry than if an image location
  is a category.  I later discovered that they didn't use `isCategory`
  and they assume any image on the home screen is a category.

Can I provide full path names to the images?

> No.  That's not portable.  You should write portable code.

Can I change the names of the images?

> I'd prefer that you don't change the names of the images.  It may
  interfere with our testing.

The interface for adding image/text pairs seems fairly cumbersome,
particularly for users with limited mobility.

> I'd agree.  Let's assume that a friend or assistant would add them.

Why do you think our `AACMappings` class would benefit from a field
of type `AssociativeArray<String, AACCategory>`?

> You'll need to keep track of the AACCategory for each image on the
  top-level page.

Why do you think our `AACMappings` class would benefit from a field
of type `AACCategory`?

> You'll need to keep track of the location-to-name mappings somewhere.
  I think it's easier if you use an `AACCategory` for uniformity.
