pages/handouts.md, before:

---
title: Handouts
permalink: /handouts/
---
# {{ page.title }}

You'd think the [syllabus](../syllabus) and [schedule](../schedule)
would provide all the info you need for a course, wouldn't you?  But
I've found over the years that it can be helpful to provide additional
information.  To ensure that you read the information, I even give you
[an assignment](../assignments/survey).  What else is there?  Let's see.

## Teaching, grading, and such

[On teaching and learning](teaching)
  : A bit of philosophy (more or less).

[Grading](grading)
  : More details on grading processes (and a bit on the underlying philosophy).

[Gradescope](gradescope)
  : A few notes on the grading platform we're using.

## Other important issues

[Accommodations and adjustments](accommodations)
  : Policies and practices (and why I use two terms)

[Accessibility of Web pages](accessibility)
  : Why I try to keep pages accessible and who to report to when they're not.

[Academic integrity](academic-integrity)
  : A long document that attempts to explain key issues of academic integrity in this course and in the discipline.

[AI programming assistants](ai)
  : Some notes on why I discourage the use of AI programming assistants in my introductory classes.

[Tips on working more productively](working-tips)
  : Some tips from students, mentors, and instructors.

## Secondary topics

[Some thoughts on electronic mail](email)
  : This page provides some details about how to best use electronic mail when dealing with me.

## Other versions of the course

These also aren't strictly handouts, but I didn't have another place for them.
The list is incomplete.

[CSC-151 2023 Fall (Jiménez)](https://jimenezp.cs.grinnell.edu/Courses/CSC207/2023Fa/syllabus/)
  : The other fall 2023 section of the course.

[CSC-151 2019 Spring (Rebelsky)](https://rebelsky.cs.grinnell.edu/~rebelsky/Courses/CSC207/2019S/01/home/)
  : The site from the last time I taught the course.

[CSC-151 2014 Spring (Rebelsky)](https://rebelsky.cs.grinnell.edu/Courses/CSC207/2014F/home/)
  : The site from the prior time I taught the course.

Commit message:

Update list of handouts (forgot tokens and note-taking).

pages/handouts.md, after:

---
title: Handouts
permalink: /handouts/
---
# {{ page.title }}

You'd think the [syllabus](../syllabus) and [schedule](../schedule)
would provide all the info you need for a course, wouldn't you?  But
I've found over the years that it can be helpful to provide additional
information.  To ensure that you read the information, I even give you
[an assignment](../assignments/survey).  What else is there?  Let's see.

## Teaching, grading, and such

[On teaching and learning](teaching)
  : A bit of philosophy (more or less).

[Grading](grading)
  : More details on grading processes (and a bit on the underlying philosophy).

[Gradescope](gradescope)
  : A few notes on the grading platform we're using.

[Tokens](tokens)
  : A few notes on obtaining and using tokens.

## Other important issues

[Accommodations and adjustments](accommodations)
  : Policies and practices (and why I use two terms)

[Accessibility of Web pages](accessibility)
  : Why I try to keep pages accessible and who to report to when they're not.

[Academic integrity](academic-integrity)
  : A long document that attempts to explain key issues of academic integrity in this course and in the discipline.

[AI programming assistants](ai)
  : Some notes on why I discourage the use of AI programming assistants in my introductory classes.

[Notes on taking notes](taking-notes)
  : Some notes on why you should take notes, along with some note-taking strategies.

## Secondary topics

[Some thoughts on electronic mail](email)
  : This page provides some details about how to best use electronic mail when dealing with me.

## Other versions of the course

These also aren't strictly handouts, but I didn't have another place for them.
The list is incomplete.

[CSC-151 2023 Fall (Jiménez)](https://jimenezp.cs.grinnell.edu/Courses/CSC207/2023Fa/syllabus/)
  : The other fall 2023 section of the course.

[CSC-151 2019 Spring (Rebelsky)](https://rebelsky.cs.grinnell.edu/~rebelsky/Courses/CSC207/2019S/01/home/)
  : The site from the last time I taught the course.

[CSC-151 2014 Spring (Rebelsky)](https://rebelsky.cs.grinnell.edu/Courses/CSC207/2014F/home/)
  : The site from the prior time I taught the course.
