_labs/array-based-lists.md, before:

---
title: Implementing Lists with Arrays
repo: <https://github.com/Grinnell-CSC207/lab-array-based-lists-c>.
summary: |
  We extend our understanding of a list ADT by considering an
  implementation of lists in which the values are stored in an
  array.
prereqs: |
  Arrays.
  [Interfaces](../readings/interfaces).
  [Generics](../readings/generics).
  [Anonymous inner classes](../readings/anonymous-inner-classes).
javadoc:
  - "[`java.util.Iterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/Iterator.html)"
  - "[`java.util.ListIterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/ListIterator.html)"
---
Preparation
-----------

a. Fork and clone the repository at {{ page.repo }}.

b. In separate windows or tabs, open the documentation for
[`java.util.Iterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/Iterator.html) and
[`java.util.ListIterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/ListIterator.html).

Exercises
---------

### Exercise 1: Understanding Iterators

Skim through the documentation for "[`java.util.Iterator`]({{
site.java_api }}/java/util/Iterator.html)" and "[`java.util.ListIterator`]({{
site.java_api }}/java/util/ListIterator.html)".  You should identify
the primary methods, their meanings, and any other subtleties.
Make sure that you can answer the following questions.

a. Where, conceptually, is a list iterator relative to the elements of
a list?

b. What element does `remove` remove?

c. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, and call `lit.add(x)`
and then immediately after call `lit.add(y)`.  In what order will
`x` and `y` appear in the list?

d. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  
Suppose we then call `lit.remove()` and then
immediately after call `lit.remove()` again.  What can or should
happen?

e. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  What should happen if we call `lit.set(x)` and then
`set(y)`?

f. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  What should happen if we call `lit.set(x)` and then
`lit.remove()`?

g. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  What should happen if we call `lit.remove()` and then
`lit.set(y)`?

h. Can we add an element immediately after creating a new list
iterator?

i. Can we remove an element immediately after creating a new list
iterator?

j. Can we set an element immediately after creating a new list iterator?

k. Can we add an element when `hasNext` is false?  If so, where is
the element added?  If not, why not?

l. Can we set an element when `hasNext` is false?  If so, which element
is set?

m. Can we remove an element when `hasNext` is false?  Never?  Sometimes?
Always?

n. Suppose we've created two list iterators, `lit1` and `lit2` for
the list [a,b,c], and both are between the a and the b in the list.
If we call `lit1.add(d)`, what should `lit2.next()` return?

o. Suppose we've created two list iterators, `lit1` and `lit2` for
the list [a,b,c], and both are between the a and the b in the list.
If we call `lit1.remove()`, what should `lit2.next()` return?

p. Are there any other subtleties that you noticed about these
two kinds of iterators?

### Exercise 2: A simple experiment

Read through the code of `SimpleListExpt.java` and
`SALExpt.java`.

a. Sketch the output you expect to see from `SALExpt`.

b. Check your sketch experimentally.

### Exercise 3: Implementation details

How are array-based-lists implemented?  It's time to look.  In the
file `SimpleArrayList.java`, you'll see that we have a field,
`values`, that stores the values in a list and a field, `size`,
that stores the size of the list.

You may also note that because iterators will need to access fields
of the list, iterators are implemented as an anonymous inner class.
Each iterator for the list has a field, `pos`, that stores the
position of the value to be returned by the next call to `next()`.

a. Sketch how you would implement the `next` method.

b. Compare your answer to that in the code.  

c. Sketch how you would implement the `hasNext()` method.

d. Compare your answer to the answer in the code.

e. Sketch how you would implement the `add(T val)` method.

f. Compare your answer to the answer in the code.

### Exercise 4: Implement `set`

You'll note that the `set` method is not yet implemented.  

a. Write a small experiment that will let you check if `set` works.
For example, you might create a list of five values and set values
0, 2, and 4 to other values.  Don't bother checking the extreme
edge cases, such as what happens when there has not been a prior
call to `next` or `previous`.

b. Here's a simple strategy for implementing `set`.  Since `pos`
represents the location of the value to be returned by `next`,
`pos-1` represents the location of the value that was last returned.
Hence, all `set` needs to do is set the value in the array at that
location.

What flaws, if any, do you see in this strategy?

c. Implement `set` using this strategy and, through your experiment,
determine whether or not it seems to work.

d. If we use this strategy, one time that `set` will fail is when
`pos` is 0.  Update your program so that it throws an exception in
such cases.

e. As you may have noted, a possible flaw in this implementation
is that, while it works when we move forward with `next`, it will
likely fail when we use `previous`.  Sketch a strategy for dealing
with this problem.

<!--
### Exercise 5: Failing fast

You may recall that in exercise 1, we asked what happens when we
mutate a list using one iterator and then try to access it using another
iterator for the same list.  You probably found that the documentation
for iterators is vague on this issue.  You should have also noted that
the vagueness is problematic.  So, what should we do?

Let's see what the designers of Java did by looking at the standard
[`java.util.ArrayList`](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/ListIterator.html) class.

> The iterators returned by this class's iterator and listIterator
  methods are fail-fast: if the list is structurally modified at
  any time after the iterator is created, in any way except through
  the iterator's own `remove` or `add` methods, the iterator will
  throw a `ConcurrentModificationException`. Thus, in the face of
  concurrent modification, the iterator fails quickly and cleanly,
  rather than risking arbitrary, non-deterministic behavior at an
  undetermined time in the future.

a. If you look at `SimpleListExpt.java`, you'll see a 
method called `failFastExpt`.  Explain to
your partner how this allows us to understand fast failure.

b. Add the following line to the `main` method
of `SALExpt.java` so that we can see if our simple array-based
lists fail fast, at least in a simple situation.  (After adding the line,
you should recompile and run `SALExpt`.

```java
  SimpleListExpt.failFastExpt(pen, new SimpleArrayList<String>());
```

c. Suppose you were called upon to implement the "fail-fast"
policy.  How would you achieve that goal?

d. Read through the code for `SimpleArrayList.java` to see
how it achieves the "fail-fast" policy.

-->

### Exercise 5: Moving backwards

You'll note that the `previous` method is not implemented.  Implement it.

### Exercise 6: Revisiting `set`

Once we implement `previous`, we are likely to break the `set`
method we defined earlier.  

a. Write an experiment that checks whether `set` works correctly
after `previous`.

b. If you discover that `set` does not work correctly, fix it.

For those with extra time
-------------------------

_If you find that you have extra time, you may want to try one or more
of the following exercises._

### Extra 1: Removing elements

Implement the `remove` method.

### Extra 2: Failing fast

What does it mean for a list iterator to have a "Fail Fast" policy?

### Extra 3: Refactoring

At this point, your code likely has a number of sections that might
be better arranged as helper methods, such as a method to expand
the underlying array, one to shift elements right, and one to
shift elements left.  Write those helper methods.

Acknowledgements
----------------

This lab is closely based on one from CSC 207 2019S.

Commit message:

Add drivers to ABL lab.

_labs/array-based-lists.md, after:

---
title: Implementing Lists with Arrays
repo: <https://github.com/Grinnell-CSC207/lab-array-based-lists-c>.
summary: |
  We extend our understanding of a list ADT by considering an
  implementation of lists in which the values are stored in an
  array.
prereqs: |
  Arrays.
  [Interfaces](../readings/interfaces).
  [Generics](../readings/generics).
  [Anonymous inner classes](../readings/anonymous-inner-classes).
javadoc:
  - "[`java.util.Iterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/Iterator.html)"
  - "[`java.util.ListIterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/ListIterator.html)"
---
Preparation
-----------

a. Fork and clone the repository at {{ page.repo }}.

b. In separate windows or tabs, open the documentation for
[`java.util.Iterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/Iterator.html) and
[`java.util.ListIterator`]({{ site.java_api }}/java/util/ListIterator.html).

Exercises
---------

### Exercise 1: Understanding Iterators

_We'll do this as a class._

Skim through the documentation for "[`java.util.Iterator`]({{
site.java_api }}/java/util/Iterator.html)" and "[`java.util.ListIterator`]({{
site.java_api }}/java/util/ListIterator.html)".  You should identify
the primary methods, their meanings, and any other subtleties.
Make sure that you can answer the following questions.

a. Where, conceptually, is a list iterator relative to the elements of
a list?

b. What element does `remove` remove?

c. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, and call `lit.add(x)`
and then immediately after call `lit.add(y)`.  In what order will
`x` and `y` appear in the list?

d. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  
Suppose we then call `lit.remove()` and then
immediately after call `lit.remove()` again.  What can or should
happen?

e. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  What should happen if we call `lit.set(x)` and then
`set(y)`?

f. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  What should happen if we call `lit.set(x)` and then
`lit.remove()`?

g. Suppose we have a list iterator, `lit`, between the b and c in
the list [a,b,c] and that it reached the current position through
a call to `next`.  What should happen if we call `lit.remove()` and then
`lit.set(y)`?

h. Can we add an element immediately after creating a new list
iterator?

i. Can we remove an element immediately after creating a new list
iterator?

j. Can we set an element immediately after creating a new list iterator?

k. Can we add an element when `hasNext` is false?  If so, where is
the element added?  If not, why not?

l. Can we set an element when `hasNext` is false?  If so, which element
is set?

m. Can we remove an element when `hasNext` is false?  Never?  Sometimes?
Always?

n. Suppose we've created two list iterators, `lit1` and `lit2` for
the list [a,b,c], and both are between the a and the b in the list.
If we call `lit1.add(d)`, what should `lit2.next()` return?

o. Suppose we've created two list iterators, `lit1` and `lit2` for
the list [a,b,c], and both are between the a and the b in the list.
If we call `lit1.remove()`, what should `lit2.next()` return?

p. Are there any other subtleties that you noticed about these
two kinds of iterators?

### Exercise 2: A simple experiment

_Driver: **A**_

Read through the code of `SimpleListExpt.java` and
`SALExpt.java`.

a. Sketch the output you expect to see from `SALExpt`.

b. Check your sketch experimentally.

### Exercise 3: Implementation details

_Driver: **B**_

How are array-based-lists implemented?  It's time to look.  In the
file `SimpleArrayList.java`, you'll see that we have a field,
`values`, that stores the values in a list and a field, `size`,
that stores the size of the list.

You may also note that because iterators will need to access fields
of the list, iterators are implemented as an anonymous inner class.
Each iterator for the list has a field, `pos`, that stores the
position of the value to be returned by the next call to `next()`.

a. Sketch how you would implement the `next` method.

b. Compare your answer to that in the code.  

c. Sketch how you would implement the `hasNext()` method.

d. Compare your answer to the answer in the code.

e. Sketch how you would implement the `add(T val)` method.

f. Compare your answer to the answer in the code.

### Exercise 4: Implement `set`

_Driver: **B**_

You'll note that the `set` method is not yet implemented.  

a. Write a small experiment that will let you check if `set` works.
For example, you might create a list of five values and set values
0, 2, and 4 to other values.  Don't bother checking the extreme
edge cases, such as what happens when there has not been a prior
call to `next` or `previous`.

b. Here's a simple strategy for implementing `set`.  Since `pos`
represents the location of the value to be returned by `next`,
`pos-1` represents the location of the value that was last returned.
Hence, all `set` needs to do is set the value in the array at that
location.

What flaws, if any, do you see in this strategy?

c. Implement `set` using this strategy and, through your experiment,
determine whether or not it seems to work.

d. If we use this strategy, one time that `set` will fail is when
`pos` is 0.  Update your program so that it throws an exception in
such cases.

e. As you may have noted, a possible flaw in this implementation
is that, while it works when we move forward with `next`, it will
likely fail when we use `previous`.  Sketch a strategy for dealing
with this problem.

<!--
### Exercise 5: Failing fast

You may recall that in exercise 1, we asked what happens when we
mutate a list using one iterator and then try to access it using another
iterator for the same list.  You probably found that the documentation
for iterators is vague on this issue.  You should have also noted that
the vagueness is problematic.  So, what should we do?

Let's see what the designers of Java did by looking at the standard
[`java.util.ArrayList`](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/ListIterator.html) class.

> The iterators returned by this class's iterator and listIterator
  methods are fail-fast: if the list is structurally modified at
  any time after the iterator is created, in any way except through
  the iterator's own `remove` or `add` methods, the iterator will
  throw a `ConcurrentModificationException`. Thus, in the face of
  concurrent modification, the iterator fails quickly and cleanly,
  rather than risking arbitrary, non-deterministic behavior at an
  undetermined time in the future.

a. If you look at `SimpleListExpt.java`, you'll see a 
method called `failFastExpt`.  Explain to
your partner how this allows us to understand fast failure.

b. Add the following line to the `main` method
of `SALExpt.java` so that we can see if our simple array-based
lists fail fast, at least in a simple situation.  (After adding the line,
you should recompile and run `SALExpt`.

```java
  SimpleListExpt.failFastExpt(pen, new SimpleArrayList<String>());
```

c. Suppose you were called upon to implement the "fail-fast"
policy.  How would you achieve that goal?

d. Read through the code for `SimpleArrayList.java` to see
how it achieves the "fail-fast" policy.

-->

### Exercise 5: Moving backwards

_Driver: **A**_

You'll note that the `previous` method is not implemented.  Implement it.

### Exercise 6: Revisiting `set`

_Driver: **A**_

Once we implement `previous`, we are likely to break the `set`
method we defined earlier.  

a. Write an experiment that checks whether `set` works correctly
after `previous`.

b. If you discover that `set` does not work correctly, fix it.

For those with extra time
-------------------------

_If you find that you have extra time, you may want to try one or more
of the following exercises._

### Extra 1: Removing elements

Implement the `remove` method.

### Extra 2: Failing fast

What does it mean for a list iterator to have a "Fail Fast" policy?

### Extra 3: Refactoring

At this point, your code likely has a number of sections that might
be better arranged as helper methods, such as a method to expand
the underlying array, one to shift elements right, and one to
shift elements left.  Write those helper methods.

Acknowledgements
----------------

This lab is closely based on one from CSC 207 2019Sp.   Drivers were added
in 2024Sp.
